

<!-- README.md is generated from README.qmd. Please edit that file -->

# Derogations, Democratic Backsliding, and International Human Rights During the COVID-19 Pandemic

[Suparna Chaudhry](https://www.suparnachaudhry.com/) • Lewis and Clark
College  
[Audrey Comstock](https://audreylcomstock.weebly.com/) • Arizona State
University  
[Andrew Heiss](https://www.andrewheiss.com/) • Andrew Young School of
Policy Studies • Georgia State University

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Abstract

Did states misuse international legal emergency provisions during the
COVID-19 pandemic to justify human rights abuse or did they follow
international human rights law? Many governments restricted citizens’
freedom of movement, association, and assembly during the crisis,
raising questions about states’ commitments to international human
rights law. Some states used derogations to communicate temporary
suspension of international legal provisions in a proportional and
non-discriminatory manner, while others did not. We explore the dynamics
of democratic backsliding and derogation use during the pandemic. We
find that backsliding states were more likely to issue human rights
treaty derogations. These derogations had mitigating effects once
issued. Backsliding states that issued derogations were more likely to
communicate restrictions and were less likely to issue abusive and
discriminatory policy during the pandemic. Derogations helped temper
abuse in states not experiencing backsliding. However, derogations did
not always protect against abuse and media transparency in backsliding
states. These results lend support to the use of flexibility mechanisms
in international law and find that most states did not use emergency
derogations to heighten human rights violations. The study contributes
to the understanding of how international legal measures may help
mitigate elements of democratic backsliding during times of crisis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 🍋👿: Note on “lemon lucifer” project name

Because project titles change all the time with revisions, rewriting,
and peer review, we used [{codename}](http://svmiller.com/codename/) to
generate an internal-to-us project name that won’t change.

``` r
library(codename)
codename_message()
#> code name generated by {codename} v.0.5.0. R version 4.4.0 (2024-04-24).

codename(type = "gods", seed = "derogate backslides")
#> [1] "lemon lucifer"
```

## Licenses

**Text and figures:** All prose and images are licensed under Creative
Commons ([CC-BY-4.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)).

**Code:** All code is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE.md).

## Contributions and Code of Conduct

We welcome contributions from everyone. Before you get started, please
see our [contributor guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md). Please note that this
project is released with a [Contributor Code of
Conduct](https://contributor-covenant.org/version/2/0/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.html).
By contributing to this project, you agree to abide by its terms.
